

Institution: University of Sheffield

Title: An image processing and analysis methodology for investigating the reshaping of the epithelium in the zebrafish otic vesicle


Abstract: The zebrafish inner ear develops from the otic vesicle, a spheroid epithelium which will reshape to form the complex orthogonally-arranged semicircular canals of the vestibular system. To understand how the cells of the otic epithelium reorganise prior to forming the canal ducts, we sought to map out changes in cell geometry, cell movements and cell divisions in the areas where the canal-forming epithelial projections were expected to emerge. The depth of the otic vesicle in the zebrafish embryo presents light scattering issues, and the technical compromises involved in imaging a large structure like the otic vesicle may reduce frame rates or stack size in the interest of maximising storage space, producing challenges in tracking cells. We present our methodology to probe the development of the otic epithelium. Transgenic markers were used to label cell nuclei and cell membranes; the membrane marker Et(smad6b:EGFP-CAAX)  is expressed most strongly on the lateral side of the ear but only weakly on the medial side. Image processing considerations begin at the point of imaging with optimal sample selection. We produced a script which chains image preprocessing steps: noise reduction, rough thresholding and 3D erosion, used to pinpoint locations of nuclei in optically difficult regions of epithelium. This step discerns closely associated structures which may get grouped together using standard watershed based segmentation techniques. These rough thresholds can be used to target finer segmentations of nuclei using existing segmentation techniques, followed by tracking of cell movements and divisions prior to pillar formation. This allowed us to detect cell divisions adjacent to the zone from which the epithelial projection will emerge; we observed that the progeny of these dividing cells move into the area that will emerge from the epithelium to join the emerging projection. These steps also prepare imaging data for the segmentation of membranes to discern changes in cell shape prior to the emergence of the projection, such as a transient elongation of the cell apicobasal length, followed by a rapid shortening as cells lift off the basal lamina to form the projection. This methodology presents a strategy to process and analyse dynamic and optically anisotropic structures from in vivo data.

Keywords: ["Common Analysis Tasks: Image Segmentation, Object Tracking, etc."]

Additional Keywords: 