Institution:
University of Sheffield, UK
University of Sheffield, UK
University of Sheffield, UK
University of Sheffield, UK
University of Sheffield, UK

Title: Tracking of microtubule growth during epithelial morphogenesis in inner ear development

Abstract:
The onset of semicircular canal formation in the zebrafish otic vesicle is accompanied by
local and dramatic changes in epithelial cell shape, including a pronounced doming of the
apical cell membrane. To test whether changes in cell shape are accompanied by
reorganisation of the cytoskeleton, we sought to image and quantify microtubule dynamics
during cell apical doming. We generated a transgenic zebrafish line expressing the
microtubule end-binding protein EB3 tagged with GFP to mark the growing ends of
microtubules (EB3 comets) in otic epithelial cells. Using super-resolution Airyscan imaging,
we captured high spatiotemporal resolution 3D time-lapse datasets to resolve and track EB3
comets in vivo. Producing such images is challenging; key caveats are photobleaching, and
scattering noise from imaging deep into the vesicle. By developing a pipeline combining the
Trackpy Python library (Allan et al., 2024) with Napari software (Napari Contributors 2019),
we were able to track EB3 comets despite these challenges. Trackpy offers open, lightweight
3D particle tracking with granular, control of feature detection, and has synergy with Napari,
which offers a powerful suite of visualisation and image processing tools. Following
debleaching via Napari, optimisation of detection parameters was required to identify EB3-
positive signal through background noise. This was achieved through analysis of feature
mass and iteration on the Trackpy bandpass cutoff. This produced 3D tracks of EB3 comets,
visualised using Napari. 3D vectors were extracted from tracks and used for determining
their angle of growth relative to the apicobasal axis. Using this method, we find an
apicobasal-to-azimuthal shift in microtubule growth direction in doming cells in comparison
with surrounding non-doming cells. This methodology can be applied across the zebrafish
otic vesicle, and has illuminated microtubule reorganisation concurrent with cell apical
reorganisation, hinting at wider subcellular reorganisation in the apical dome.


Allan, D. B., Caswell, T., Keim, N. C., van der Wel, C. M., &amp; Verweij, R. W. (2024). soft-
matter/trackpy: v0.6.4 (v0.6.4). Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.12708864


Napari Contributors (2019). Napari: a multi-dimensional image viewer for python.
doi:10.5281/zenodo.3555620

Themes: ["BioMedical Applications of Image Analysis"]

Keywords: Microscopy, Development, Tracking, In vivo

Gender of presenting author: Man